---
title: 'Black Theology'
date: 2024-01-01T11:14:35-05:00
draft: false
author: "Andrew Qie"
tags: ['theology']
---

> Christian theology is never just a rational study of the being of God. Rather it is a study of God's liberating activity in the world, God's activity in behalf of the oppressed.

Cone的神学很有温度，他拒绝冷冰冰的思辨，拒绝纯粹理性的思考，拒绝形上学的道路，因为在他看来，以上这些路径都是对他同胞尊严的践踏，是漠不关心。Yes, 我知道很多人不喜欢这种暴躁的态度，但可能是这些人没有尝过被人践踏的真实滋味，当这些痛苦的经验没有发生在自己身上的时候，人就容易遗忘和忽略，最后还可能更确信自己行为的正当性，开始攻击这种“非理性”态度的“危险”。

Cone在后记里说，这本书里记载的神学诞生于特殊的历史处境，是美国黑人在民权运动的抗争中面对着白人神学和基督徒的冷漠之时所写成的书，这是对白人神学的审判，是对高呼基督救赎却对自己的邻舍无动于衷的审判。他们（白人）的行动表露他们所信的耶稣是白人，所以我们要杀掉这位耶稣，好让黑色的基督活过来。让那与贫穷、瞎眼、瘸腿之人站在一起的基督活过来。

> Realizing that white racism is an insanity comparable to Nazism, black theology seeks to articulate a theological ethos consistent with the black revolutionary struggle. Blacks know that there is only one possible authentic existence in this society, and that is to force a radical revolutionary confrontation with the structures of white power by saying yes to the essence of their blackness. The role of black theology is to tell blacks to focus on their own self-determination as a community by preparing to do anything the community believes necessary for its existence.

> Theological language is passionate language, the language of commitment, because it is language which seeks to vindicate the afflicted and condemn the enforcers of evil. Christian theology cannot afford to be an abstract, dispassionate discourse on the nature of God in relation to humankind; such an analysis has no ethical implications for the contemporary forms of oppression in our society. Theology must take the risk of faith, knowing that it stands on the edge of condemnation by the forces of evil.

> The sin of American theology is that it has spoken without passion. It has failed miserably in relating its work to the oppressed in society by refusing to confront the structures of this nation with the evils of racism. When it has tried to speak for the poor, it has been so cool and calm in its analysis of human evil that it implicitly disclosed whose side it was on. Most of the time American theology has simply remained silent, ignoring the condition of the victims of this racist society. How else can we explain the theological silence during the period of white lynching of black humanity in this nation? How else can we explain the inability of white religionists to deal relevantly with the new phenomenon of black consciousness? And how else can we explain the problem white seminaries are having as they seek to respond to radical black demands? There is really only one answer: American theology is racist; it identifies theology as dispassionate analysis of “the tradition,” unrelated to the sufferings of the oppressed.
大爱这一段，说得太好！

> There is a close correlation between political and religious conservatism. Whites who insist on verbal infallibility are often the most violent racists. If they can be sure, beyond any doubt, of their views of scripture, then they can be equally resolute in imposing their views on society as a whole. With God on their side there is nothing that will be spared in the name of “the laws of God and men.” It becomes an easy matter to kill blacks, Amerindians, or anybody else who questions their right to make decisions on how the world ought to be governed.
非常敏锐的观察，也符合我的观察和经验。

Cone提及所有神学认识论中隐含的本体论态度（Tillich），意思是说，在神学的思辨和理性背后，神学表达出来的是一种伦理态度，其对弱者和受压迫者的冷漠便充分说明了这一点。在此，Cone对比了德国的神学和同时代美国神学的区别，前者在纳粹统治时期表现出了对抗强权的勇气，在政治权威的压迫面前指出其危险和虚伪。而后者除了极少数的神学家之外，更多表现出来的是无声和漠然。这就是Cone所指责的白人神学。难道今天这样的神学消失了吗？并没有！

> The theoretical question, “Is there knowledge of God independent of the Bible?” is irrelevant. It is not the theologian's task to settle logical problems unrelated to human affairs. It is the theologian's task to speak to the times, pointing to God's revelation in current events.

> Black theology does not deny that all persons are sinners. What it denies is white reflection on the sin of blacks. Only blacks can speak about sin from a black perspective and apply it to black and white persons. The white vision of reality is too distorted and renders whites incapable of talking to the oppressed about their shortcomings.

> The refusal of black theology to put new wine in old wineskins also means that it will show that the God of the black community cannot be confused with the God of white seminaries. With their intellectual expertise, it is inevitable that white scholars fall into the racist error of believing that they have the right to define what is and what is not orthodox religious talk. Because they have read so many of their own books and heard themselves talk so often, it is not surprising that they actually believe most of the garbage they spout out about God. They therefore think that all authentic God-talk must meet their approval before it can be called theology. But black theology rejects their standards, for we know they speak for oppressors, and thus will inevitably analyze the nature of God in the interests of white society as a whole.
这才是金玉良言！

> Black theology also rejects any identification with the “death of God” theology. The death-of-God question is a white issue which arises out of the white experience. Questions like “How do we find meaning and purpose in a world in which God is absent?” are questions of an affluent society. Whites may wonder how to find purpose in their lives, but our purpose is forced upon us. We do not want to know how we can get along without God, but how we can survive in a world permeated with white racism.
中国教会需要问自身处境下真正面临的问题，而不是将外来的非本己的经验移植到本土，然后宣称那就是我们所面临的问题。所谓的“世俗化”的老生常谈，所谓“自由派”的攻击之类的问题都是这种外来的移植问题，都不是本己的问题。那么，到底什么是本己问题？这些问题需要在中国现今社会处境中去寻找，不能局限在某些信徒的阅读和个体“属灵”意识，而是需要从社会调查，普通人的生活经验中去寻找。基督徒首先要做的不是将自身与外在的环境隔离开来，分清“敌我”，而是需要体认普通人的生活状况，去认同他们的悲与苦。然后，我们才能真正抓住问题的关键。

> When blacks say that “all is in God's hand,” this should not be equated with the trite expression “We should do nothing.” It should be taken to mean that blacks are now free to be for the black community, to make decisions about their existence in the world without an undue preoccupation with white ideas about “odds” (we have all the guns) or victory (you cannot win). Ultimately (and this is what God's transcendence means) black humanity is not dependent on our power to win. Despite the empirical odds, our involvement in our liberation is not pointless; it is not absurd. It refers to the depth and meaning of our being-in-the-world.

> The weakness of most “Christian” approaches to anthropology stems from a preoccupation with (and distortion of) the God-problem, leaving concrete, oppressed human beings unrecognized and degraded. This is evident, for instance, in fundamentalist and orthodox theologies when they view the infallibility of the Bible as the sole ground of religious authority and fail to ask about the relevance of the inerrancy of scripture to the wretched of the earth. If the basic truth of the gospel is that the Bible is the infallible word of God, then it is inevitable that more emphasis will be placed upon “true” propositions about God than upon God as active in the liberation of the oppressed of the land. Blacks, struggling for survival, are not interested in abstract truth, “infallible” or otherwise. Truth is concrete.

> The image of God refers to the way in which God intends human beings to live in the world. The image of God is thus more than rationality, more than what so-called neo-orthodox theologians call divine-human encounter. In a world in which persons are oppressed, the image is human nature in rebellion against the structures of oppression. It is humanity involved in the liberation struggle against the forces of inhumanity.

> Sin as a Community Concept. In order to understand clearly the function of sin in the biblical tradition, it is necessary to point out that it is meaningful only in the context of the Israelite community. Sin is not an abstract idea that defines ethical behavior for all and sundry. Rather it is a religious concept that defines the human condition as separated from the essence of the community. **To be in sin has nothing to do with disobeying laws that are alien to the community's existence. Quite the contrary, failure to destroy the powers that seek to enforce alien laws on the community is to be in a state of sin.** It is incumbent on all members of the community to define their existence according to the community's essence and to defend the community against that which seeks to destroy it.
这是非常深刻的洞见，尤其是加粗的这句。

> Generally, white fundamentalists have identified sin with moral impurity. More sophisticated liberal and neo-orthodox thinkers have spoken in hushed solemnity about our broken relationship with God—but that is all they say. We are still waiting for an interpretation of sin in relation to the world at large. Invariably, white theologians analyze sin as if blacks and whites represent one community. On the one hand, Billy Graham and his cohorts are saying that the trouble with the world is that humankind needs God; we need to turn from our wicked ways. The wicked ways, of course, refer to the failure to live according to the rules of white society. On the other hand, other whites are saying that the problem stems from a broken relation with God—a far more serious analysis than Graham's simplistic one. But we are still waiting for the meaning of this, as blacks get ready for revolution. We wait in vain because oppressors do not wish to know what is wrong with the world. Only the oppressed know what is wrong, because they are both the victims of evil and the recipients of God's liberating activity.

> What, then, does sin mean for whites from the black perspective? The sin of whites is the definition of their existence in terms of whiteness. It is accepting the condition that is responsible for Amerindian reservations, black concentration camps, and the rape of Vietnam. It is believing in the American way of life as defined by its history.
这在当今的美国仍旧是至理真言！

> White conservatives and liberals alike present images of a white Jesus that are completely alien to the liberation of the black community. Their Jesus is a mild, easy-going white American who can afford to mouth the luxuries of “love,” “mercy,” “long-suffering,” and other white irrelevancies, because he has a multibillion-dollar military force to protect him from the encroachments of the ghetto and the “communist conspiracy.” But black existence is existence in a hostile world without the protection of the law.

> It is to be expected that some whites will resent the christological formulation of the black Christ, either by ignoring it or by viewing it as too narrow to include the universal note of the gospel. It will be difficult for whites to deny the whiteness of their existence and affirm the oppressed black Christ. But the concept of black, which includes both what the world means by oppression and what the gospel means by liberation, is the only concept that has any real significance today. If Christ is not black, then who is he? We could say that he is the son of God, son of Man, messiah, lord, son of David, and a host of other titles. The difficulty with these titles is not that they fail to describe the person of Christ, but they are first-century titles. To cling to them without asking, “What appropriate symbol do these titles refer to today?” is to miss the significance of them altogether.

> Prayer is not kneeling morning, noon, and evening. This is a tradition that is characteristic of whites; they use it to reinforce the rightness of their destruction of blacks. Prayer is the spirit that is evident in all oppressed communities when they know that they have a job to do. It is the communication with the divine that makes them know that they have very little to lose in the fight against evil and a lot to gain. We can only lose our physical lives but can gain what the writer of the Fourth Gospel calls eternal life and what blacks call blackness. To retreat from the world is to lose one's life and become what others say we are.

> Unfortunately black churches are also guilty of prostituting the name of God's church. Having originally come into being because they knew that political involvement in societal liberation of blacks was equivalent with the gospel, it is a sad fact that in subsequent decades they all but lost their reason for being. Except for rare prophetic figures like Jesse Jackson and Albert Cleage, the black denominational churches seem to be content with things as they are, getting fat on the misery of their sisters and brothers. Although possessing the greatest potentiality for black revolution, the black churches satisfy themselves with white solutions to earthly injustice. That is why persons interested in justice in this world so often scorn the black church, saying that it is nothing but a second-rate oppressor.

> Black theology rejects as invalid the attempt of oppressors to escape the question of death. White rulers in society seek to evade the reality of their end by devising recreational hobbies. They play golf, vacation in distant lands, live in all manner of luxury. Instead of facing up to the reality of finite existence and the anxiety that accompanies it, they pretend that their eternality is dependent on their political, social, and economic dominance over the weak and helpless. With their power to control history, the present and future of other human beings, who can deny that they are the masters of the world's destiny? It is their confidence in their own present strength that renders them incapable of looking the future squarely in the face. Oppressors do not know death because they do not know themselves—their finiteness and future end.

