---
title: 'Introversion and Extroversion'
date: 2023-12-18T16:44:39-05:00
draft: false
author: "Andrew Qie"
tags: ['theology', 'reflection']
---

> Sanctification, or the process toward Spiritual maturity, conquers lonelines by providing for solitude and communion in interdependence. A decisive symptom of Spiritual maturity is the power to sustain solitude. Sanctification conquers introversion by turning the personal center not outward, in extroversion, but toward the dimension of its depth and its height. Relatedness needs the vertical dimension in order to actualize itself in the horizontal dimension...A mature self-relatedness is the state of reconciliation between the self as subject and the self as object and the spontaneous affirmation of one's essential being beyond subject and object. As the process of sanctification approaches a more mature self-relatedness, the individual is more spontaneous, more self-affirming, without self-elevation or self-humiliation. The "search for identity" is the search for what has been called "self-relatedness." Properly understood, this search is not the desire to preserve an accidental state of the existential self, the self in estrangement but rather the drive toward a self which transcends every contigent state of its development and which remains unaltered in its essence through such changes. The process of sanctification runs toward a state in which the "search for identity" reaches its goal, which is the identity of the essential self shining through the contingencies of the existing self.

成圣是可以承受独处的能力，若没有纵向的深度，水平方向的关系也会受到减损。

> In practice both orthodox Protestantism and pietism agree fundamentally with the Catholic answer---in spite of the Protestant principle. The intellectualist distortion of faith into acceptance of the literal authority of the Bible (which in practice means the authority of the ecclesiastical creeds) leads orthodoxy to an idea of perfection in which doubt is banned while sin is considered unavoidable. Against this assertion, one could point to the fact that there is a doubt that is an unavoidable implication of sin, both being expressions of the state of estrangement. But the problem is not that of doubt as a consequence of sin; the problem is that of doubt as an element of faith. And just this must be asserted from the point of view of the Protestant principle. The infinite distance between God and man is never bridged; it is identical with man's finitude. Therefore creative courage is an element of faith even in the state of perfection, and where there is courage, there is risk and the doubt implied in risk. Faith would not be faith but mystical union were it deprived of the element of doubt within it.

Tillich对信心和疑惑的分析精彩至极。先前我有个教授说现在很多人在正面回应doubt，她觉得不以为然，觉得应该加强所谓的“确信”。一种肤浅而表面的反对，在Tillich的分析下显得幼稚而苍白。信心和疑惑在本质上是一体两面。

> In so far as the churches represent the Spiritual Community is the ambiguous way of religion, their influence on the culture is itself ambiguous. This situation stands against all theocratic attemtps to subject the culture to a church in the name of the Spiritual Community, and it also stands against all profanizing attempts to keep the churches in seclusion from the general cultural life. 

> ...The opposite attitude violates the object of education and guidance by transforming him into an object without subjectivity and therefore incapable of being educated to his own fulfillment or guided toward his ultimate aim. He can only be controlled by indoctrination, commands, tricks, "brainwashing," and so on, and in extreme cases, as in concentration camps, by methods of dehumanization which deprive him of his subjectivity by depriving him of the necessary biological and psychological conditions for existing as a person.

这难道不是中国现今情况的真实写照吗？