---
title: 'Moltmann on Theology'
date: 2023-12-20T05:02:32-05:00
draft: false
author: "Andrew Qie"
tags: ['theology']
---
一本研究三一论的重要著作，对经典三一论提出很多重要的问题，也试图解决里面的矛盾和问题。对我来说，让我触动较深的是，如何从对上帝的理解过渡到对世界的理解，也就是说，看似形而上的上帝论如何与我们这些造物相关。我认为Moltmann最大的贡献也就在这里。最后提及的政治神学，具体来说，三一论和政治想象之间的关系，的确非常精彩，也与当下息息相关。


> Today it is the best ethical and political theology, because it tries to do, and teaches us to do, what is needful today for the needs of the oppressed. / But Christian love is not merely a motivation, and Christian faith is more than the point from which action takes its bearings. Being a Christian is also characterized by gratitude, joy, praise and adoration. Faith lives in meditation and prayer as well as in practice. Without the vita contemplativa the vita activa quickly becomes debased into activism, falling a victim to the pragmatism of the modern meritocratic society which judges by performance. Of course there is a speculative trivialization of the concept of God. But it can be pragmatically trivialized too.


Jürgen Moltmann, The Trinity and the Kingdom: The Doctrine of God, trans. Margaret Kohl (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1993), 7.

> But what does this characteristically Christian answer mean in relation to those other concepts of God, which theology took over for itself in the course of its history? How are we to understand the reality of the world if we are to understand God, not as supreme substance and not as absolute subject, but as triunity, the three-in-one?

传统的“上帝本质”与“上帝位格”，或者说“一”与“三”之间存在张力和矛盾。

> The Western tradition began with God’s unity and then went on to ask about the trinity. We are beginning with the trinity of the Persons and shall then go on to ask about the unity. What then emerges is a concept of the divine unity as the union of the tri-unity, a concept which is differentiated and is therefore capable of being thought first of all.

> Suffering as punishment for sin is an explanation that has a very limited value. The desire to explain suffering is already highly questionable in itself. Does an explanation not lead us to justify suffering and give it permanence? Does it not lead the suffering person to come to terms with his suffering, and to declare himself in agreement with it? And does this not mean that he gives up hope of overcoming suffering?

> God becomes the God who identifies himself with men and women to the point of death, and beyond. The incarnation of the Son is not something transitional. It is and remains to all eternity. There is no God other than the incarnate, human God who is one with men and women.

> Are there also statements which suggest that we ought to assume that the Holy Spirit is the independent subject of his own acts? Is the Holy Spirit the subject of acts affecting the Son and the Father? For it is only in this sense that it would be justifiable to call the Holy Spirit a divine person.

> The doctrine of the perichoresis links together in a brilliant way the threeness and the unity, without reducing the threeness to the unity, or dissolving the unity in the threeness. The unity of the triunity lies in the eternal perichoresis of the trinitarian persons. Interpreted perichoretically, the trinitarian persons form their own unity by themselves in the circulation of the divine life.

> In Western Europe, princely absolutism and feudalism were succeeded by middle-class liberalism; but this liberalism none the less went on clinging to the model of feudal lordship. Everyone who bears a human visage has the same right to liberty, say the liberals. This liberty of every individual only finds its limits where it infringes the liberty of others. Anyone who lays claim to his own freedom must respect the same freedom on the part of the other person. But that means that for this middle-class liberalism too, freedom means lordship. Everyone finds in the other person a competitor in the struggle for power and possession. Everyone is for everyone else merely the limitation of his own freedom. Everyone is free in himself, but no one shares in the other. In its ideal form this is a society of individuals who do not disturb one another but who are themselves solitary. No one determines the other, everyone determines himself. Freedom has then really become general. Everyone has the right to be free. But is this true freedom?

> The trinitarian doctrine of the kingdom is the theological doctrine of freedom. The theological concept of freedom is the concept of the trinitarian history of God: God unceasingly desires the freedom of his creation. God is the inexhaustible freedom of those he has created.

