---
title: 'Moltmann'
date: 2023-12-19T07:11:06-05:00
draft: false
author: "Andrew Qie"
tags: ['theology']
---

> Christians, churches and theologians who passionately defend true belief, pure doctrine and distinctive Christian morality are at the present day in danger of lapsing into this pusillanimous faith. Then they build a defensive wall round their own little group, and in apocalyptic terms call themselves the ‘little flock’ or the ‘faithful remnant’, and abandon the world outside to the godlessness and immorality which they themselves lament. They lament the assimilation of Christianity to the secularized society which has declined since the ‘good old days’, and bewail the loss of identity of those who in theology and in practice involve themselves in the conflicts of this society and work with others to resolve them. But by this reaction, they themselves are running the risk of a loss of identity by passive assimilation. They accept the increasing isolation of the church as an insignificant sect on the margin of society, and encourage it by their sectarian withdrawal. The symptoms of the increase of this kind of sectarian mentality at the present day include the preservation of tradition without the attempt to found new tradition; biblicism without liberating preaching; increasing unwillingness to undergo new experience with the gospel and faith, and the language of zealotry and militant behaviour in disputes within the church.

Jürgen Moltmann, The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ as the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 20.

> Luther developed his theologia crucis as the programme of critical and Reformation theology. Theologia crucis is not a single chapter in theology, but the key signature for all Christian theology. It is a completely distinctive kind of theology. It is the point from which all theological statements which seek to be Christian are viewed (W. von Löwenich). And yet it only remains theologia crucis in the context of critical and liberating practice in preaching and life. The theology of the cross is a practical doctrine for battle, and can therefore become neither a theory of Christianity as it is now, nor the Christian theory of world history. It is a dialectic and historical theology, and not a theology of world history. It does not state what exists, but sets out to liberate men from their inhuman definitions and their idolized assertions, in which they have become set, and in which society has ensnared them.

Jürgen Moltmann, The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ as the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 72.

> To speak metaphorically, the cross of Christ is the source of a permanent iconoclasm of the christological icons of the church and the portraits of Jesus in Christianity; and the theology of the cross is a kind of iconoclasm of the christological images and titles of the church. It is iconoclasm for Jesus’ sake and is justified and regulated by the recollection of his cross.

Jürgen Moltmann, The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ as the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 87.

> For Kant practical reason provided the framework of categories for theology and also for christology. Anything ‘which is of no practical use’ does not concern us. ‘Scripture texts which contain certain theoretical doctrines stated to be sacred, but surpassing every conception of reason (even of moral reason) may be expounded for the benefit of the practical reason, while those which conflict with practical reason must be so expounded.’ The doctrine of the Trinity ‘offers absolutely nothing of practical use … And the same is true of the doctrine of the incarnation of one divine person.’ Something similar can be said of the stories of the resurrection and ascension. For ‘articles of faith do not mean what ought to be believed … but what for practical (moral) purposes it is practical and useful to accept, even though it may not be possible to prove it, but only to believe it.’ Thus the revelation of God can only be what is in agreement with what reason understands to be ‘appropriate to God’. ‘In this way all expositions of scripture, in so far as they concern religion, must be made in accordance with the principle of morality intended in revelation, and without this are either in practice empty or even hindrances to good.’ For we understand only him who speaks with us through our own understanding and our own reason. Therefore ‘the God in us’, i.e. the free conscience, is ‘himself the interpreter’.

Jürgen Moltmann, The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ as the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 93–94.

> Schleiermacher, on the other hand, considered that the mediating factor between the ideal and the real, between theoretical and practical reason, being and consciousness, lay in direct awareness, in ‘feeling’. By this he meant the basic characteristic of human existence. Here is the seat of the religious factor, in the emotional nature of the whole of life, before human activities are extended into knowledge and practice. Consequently, Schleiermacher did not attempt to discuss Christ in terms of theological metaphysics, yet did not restrict himself to a christology of moral example. In the context of the basic characteristic of existential life, he developed a christology of the personal relationship of faith to Jesus.

Jürgen Moltmann, The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ as the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 94–95.

> Historical Christianity has lived not so much under the shadow of its original disappointment, as by the anticipation of the kingdom. This gave rise to the triumphalism of the theocratic state or the state church, which regularly led to the persecution of the Jews and other representatives of unfulfilled messianic hope. A faith which worships Christ as God without his future, a church which understands itself as the kingdom and a consciousness of atonement which no longer suffers from the continued unredeemed condition of the world, a Christian state which regards itself as God here present upon earth, cannot tolerate any Jewish hope beside itself. But is this still authentic Christian faith?

Jürgen Moltmann, The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ as the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 101.

> But historical criticism in the name of the historical Jesus not only directed ideological criticism against church doctrines, but also criticized the testimonies of the primitive Christian faith in Christ which are gathered together in the scriptures. The standard by which a doctrine could be judged to be in accordance with scripture, that of the apostolicity, sufficiency and unambiguity of scripture, collapsed in the face of the disagreements and errors which historians unearthed in scripture. It was replaced by the general scientific standard of knowledge firmly based on historical criticism. It made faith a matter of arbitrary choice and located the basis of faith in man’s free subjectivity.

Jürgen Moltmann, The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ as the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 117.

> A historical understanding of the history of Jesus must understand his history as a theological history defined in this way; otherwise it understands nothing. His death on the cross, however, cannot be understood solely from the more immediate circumstances of his ministry, but only through the interaction between Jesus, the Jews and the Romans.

Jürgen Moltmann, The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ as the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 127.

> The kingdom does not come as judgment, so that one must anticipate it in one’s self through repentance in order to endure. Rather, anticipated by the word of the gospel which Jesus preached and his living offering of himself to the poor, the sinners and the tax-collectors, it comes as the unconditional and free grace of God, by which the lost are sought out and those without rights, and the unrighteous, are accepted. It is this different and new righteousness of God promised and demonstrated by Jesus which separates him from John the Baptist and his repentance movement in Israel.

Jürgen Moltmann, The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ as the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 129–130.

耶稣所传的福音和悔改的消息，与施洗约翰相比，是违反以色列律法的常识的。他没有宣告审判，而是对贫穷之人的怜悯和拯救。他宣告的不是世界毁灭，而是可怜之人会得到拣选。他所选上的不是富有的人、敬虔的人，而是贫穷、犯罪的人。很多信了很久的信徒无法真正体会这句话的道理，他们以为自己信得久和敬虔就是耶稣喜悦的了，但恰恰是这些人才是耶稣要审判的人。