---
title: 'The Crucified God'
date: 2023-12-19T18:54:44-05:00
draft: false
author: "Andrew Qie"
tags: ['theology']
---

想要说的，想要写的实在是太多了，但现在没有时间。只能等到以后一一捡起来，Moltmann这本四十多年的“老书”在这个时代，无论是对中国还是美国，都是紧贴时代的神学巨著，值得探讨，在此基础之上写作，思考。

> The kingdom does not come as judgment, so that one must anticipate it in one’s self through repentance in order to endure. Rather, anticipated by the word of the gospel which Jesus preached and his living offering of himself to the poor, the sinners and the tax-collectors, it comes as the unconditional and free grace of God, by which the lost are sought out and those without rights, and the unrighteous, are accepted. It is this different and new righteousness of God promised and demonstrated by Jesus which separates him from John the Baptist and his repentance movement in Israel.


> If the future of God ‘has already begun’ with his resurrection, what is the significance of his suffering and death?


> The theology of Easter hope must be changed into the theology of the cross, if it is to set our feet on the ground of the reality of the death of Christ and our own death. The reversal just mentioned makes that possible. God has anticipated the future of his liberating righteousness in this one man and sent him before in order that this one man may communicate it to others. If the resurrection has already been anticipated in him, then ‘resurrection, life and righteousness’ come through the death of this one man in favour of those who have been delivered over to death through their unrighteousness. Through his suffering and death, the risen Christ brings righteousness and life to the unrighteous and the dying. Thus the cross of Christ modifies the resurrection of Christ under the conditions of the suffering of the world so that it changes from being a purely future event to being an event of liberating love. 


> The cross is the form of the coming, redeeming kingdom, and the crucified Jesus is the incarnation of the risen Christ. In the crucified Jesus the ‘end of history’ is present in the midst of the relationships of history. Therefore in him can be found reconciliation in the midst of strife and hope for the overcoming of strife.


> The anticipation of the resurrection of the dead in the resurrection of Jesus from the dead may have a stimulating effect on men who are open to the world and to the future. But for men who are closed to the future, and without hope, for the homo incurvatus in se and for the Narcissus who is sadly in love with himself, it means nothing, for it does not reach them. Only Christ’s representative suffering and sacrifice ‘for them’ in his death on the cross brings hope to the hopeless, future to those who are passing away and new right to the unrighteous.


> With the Christian message of the cross of Christ, something new and strange has entered the metaphysical world. For this faith must understand the deity of God from the event of the suffering and death of the Son of God and thus bring about a fundamental change in the orders of being of metaphysical thought and the value tables of religious feeling. It must think of the suffering of Christ as the power of God and the death of Christ as God’s potentiality.


自然神学对上帝的寻求当然是不可或缺的，但与此同时，十字架上上帝之子的死也是理解上帝的无法忽略的一部分。如何将二者结合在一起呢？"As a theology of the cross, Christian theology is the criticism of and liberation from philosophical and political monotheism." Moltmann试图将十字架神学与自然神学结合在一起理解。Fascinating, but I have certain reservations.

> The mere separation of Christian theology from philosophical theology and the interpretation of the world, time and man’s self leads only to the self-isolation of theology and helps no one. It leads to a theologia gloriae from below. The important thing, therefore, is to think of the God of the cross quite consistently not only in the sphere of theology but also in the sphere of social life and the personality of man, in the realm of society, politics and finally even that of cosmology.

> Cosmological theism answers this double question with a justification of this world as God’s world. In so doing it passes over the history of suffering of this world. Either it must be tolerated, or it will be compensated for by the second world in heaven./ This answer is idolatry.

> Our question, rather, is: if we are to understand the ‘human’, the ‘crucified’ God, must we think of God in trinitarian terms? And conversely, can we think of God in trinitarian terms if we do not have the event of the cross in mind?

> From the time of Melanchthon, and particularly since Schleiermacher and the moral theology of the nineteenth century, the doctrine of the Trinity seems to have been regarded in Protestantism as no more than a theological speculation with no relevance for life, a kind of higher theological mystery for initiates. 

> The move from pure theory to the theory of practice is further demonstrated in the whole of modern thought. This is no longer contemplative thought but operational thought. Reason is no longer perceptive, but productive. It no longer seeks to recognize permanent being in reality, but seeks to recognize in order to change. Modern thought is thought concerned with work and production. It is pragmatic: reality is efficiency. Theories are not verified by eternal ideas but through practice and its results. 

> Why did the doctrine of the Trinity become isolated speculation and a mere decoration for dogmatics after the Middle Ages? Karl Rahner has pointed out that after the supplanting of the Sentences of Peter Lombard by the Summa of Thomas Aquinas, a momentous distinction was introduced into the doctrine of God. This was the distinction between the tractates De Deo uno and De Deo triuno and the order in which they are put, which is still felt to be a matter of course even today. The purpose behind this separation and arrangement was apologetic. Following Thomas, one began with the question ‘Is there a God?’, and demonstrated with the help of the natural light of human reason and the cosmological arguments for the existence of God that there was a God and that God was one. Then, with the same method, conclusions were drawn as to the metaphysical, non-human properties of the divine nature. This knowledge was assigned to natural theology. Only then was a move made to describe the inner being of God with the aid of the supernatural light of grace, a move towards theologica christiana, theologia salvifica, the saving knowledge of God.

> Only if all disaster, forsakenness by God, absolute death, the infinite curse of damnation and sinking into nothingness is in God himself, is community with this God eternal salvation, infinite joy, indestructible election and divine life.

> It is not the interpretation of love as an ideal, a heavenly power or as a commandment, but of love as an event in a loveless, legalistic world: the event of an unconditioned and boundless love which comes to meet man, which takes hold of those who are unloved and forsaken, unrighteous or outside the law, and gives them a new identity, liberates them from the norms of social identifications and from the guardians of social norms and idolatrous images.

> But anyone who cries out to God in this suffering echoes the death-cry of the dying Christ, the Son of God. In that case God is not just a hidden someone set over against him, to whom he cries, but in a profound sense the human God, who cries with him and intercedes for him with his cross where man in his torment is dumb. The one who suffers is not just angry and furious and full of protest against his fate. He suffers because he lives, and he is alive because he loves. The person who can no longer love, even himself, no longer suffers, for he is without grief, without feeling and indifferent. This apathy is the sickness of our time, a sickness of person and systems, a sickness to death, to personal and universal death. But the more one loves, the more one is open and becomes receptive to happiness and sorrow. Therefore the one who loves becomes vulnerable, can be hurt and disappointed. This may be called the dialectic of human life: we live because and in so far as we love—and we suffer and die because and in so far as we love. In this way we experience life and death in love.

> There is no threat to man which arouses more hostility than to threaten his idols or those of his group. As long as a man identifies himself with such idols, he is not in a position to affirm himself as a free man while recognizing that the life of others may be different. He loves only what is like, and only acknowledges people who believe, think, love and do the things that he does. People like himself support him, and he needs this support to suppress his anxiety. People who differ from him disturb him, because they question his idols and laws and thus his world. So he loves only those who are like him, and hates other men. This is an important motive for xenophobia, antisemitism, racial hatred, the persecution of Communists and Christians and other manifestations of aggression. Love only for those who are like oneself is narcissistic. The religion of anxiety runs straight through all the public religions that we know. It also runs straight through the ideologies and institutions that we have. It is a widespread phenomenon. / The pattern formations of repression and the idols and laws of the religion of anxiety may not either suffer or die, since they have been erected against suffering and dying. They must be omnipotent and eternal, because they are meant to help impotent and mortal man and to relieve his anxiety. Anyone who damages the idols and laws, damages the holiest goods of those who worship them. But the crucified God renounces these privileges of an idol. He breaks the spell of the super-ego which men lay upon him because they need this self-protection. In humbling himself and becoming flesh, he does not accept the laws of this world, but takes up suffering, anxious man into his situation. In becoming weak, impotent, vulnerable and mortal, he frees man from the quest for powerful idols and protective compulsions and makes him ready to accept his humanity, his freedom and his mortality. In the situation of the human God the pattern formations of repressions become unnecessary. The limitations of apathy fall away. Man can open himself to suffering and to love. In sympatheia with the pathos of God he becomes open to what is other and new. 

> If we understand Christian faith as the development of a humanity that is capable of suffering and love in the situation of the passion of God, it will not be affected by the criticism of religion made by psychoanalysis. 

> Suffering in a superficial, activist, apathetic and therefore dehumanized society can be a sign of spiritual health. In this sense, we must agree with Freud’s remark, ‘As long as a man suffers, he can still achieve something.’



